Added Azure.VM.PublicIPAttached (#3012)
Azure/PSRule.Rules.Azure: docs/en/rules/Azure.VM.PublicIPAttached.md

---
severity: Critical
pillar: Security
category: SE:06 Network controls
resource: Virtual Machine
online version: https://azure.github.io/PSRule.Rules.Azure/en/rules/Azure.VM.PublicIPAttached/
---

# Public IPs attached

## SYNOPSIS

Avoid attaching public IPs directly to virtual machines.

## DESCRIPTION

> Attaching a public IP address to a virtual machine exposes it directly to the internet. This exposure can make the VM vulnerable to unauthorized access and potential compromise if appropriate security measures are not implemented.
> 
> For enhanced security, inbound and outbound traffic should be managed through a centralized Azure Firewall or Network Virtual Appliance (NVA), ensuring control over both east/west and north/south traffic.
> Minimizing the number of internet egress points enhances security and reduces potential attack surfaces.
> 
> For secure RDP and SSH access to virtual machines, consider using Azure Bastion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Attaching a public IP address to a virtual machine network interface (NIC) exposes it directly to the Internet.
This exposure can make the VM vulnerable to unauthorized inbound access and security compromise.
Minimize the number of Internet ingress/ egress points to enhance security and reduces potential attack surfaces.

For enhanced security, consider one or more of the following options:

- **Secure remote access** &mdash; by RDP or SSH to virtual machines can be configured through Azure Bastion.
  - Azure Bastion provides a secure encrypted connection without exposing a public IP.
- **Exposing web services** &mdash; by HTTP/S can be configured by App Gateway or Azure Front Door (AFD).
  - App Gateway and AFD provide a secure reverse proxy that supports web application firewall (WAF) filtering.
- **Internet connectivity** &mdash; should be managed through a security hardened device such as Azure Firewall.
  - This option also allows additional controls to be applied for east/ west and north/ south traffic filtering.
  - Alternatively a Network Virtual Appliance (NVA) can used.
```

## RECOMMENDATION

Evaluate alternative methods for inbound access to virtual machines to enhance security and minimize risk.

### Configure with Azure template

> To deploy virtual machines that pass this rule:
> 
> - For each IP configuration specified in the `properties.ipConfigurations` property:
>  - Ensure that the `properties.publicIPAddress.id` property does not reference a Public IP resource.
> 
>  For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To deploy VM network interfaces that pass this rule:

- For each IP configuration specified in the `properties.ipConfigurations` property:
  - Ensure that the `properties.publicIPAddress.id` property does not reference a Public IP resource.

For example:
```

```json
{
  "type": "Microsoft.Network/networkInterfaces",
  "apiVersion": "2023-11-01",
  "name": "[parameters('nicName')]",
  "location": "[parameters('location')]",
  "properties": {
    "ipConfigurations": [
      {
        "name": "[parameters('ipConfig')]",
        "properties": {
          "privateIPAllocationMethod": "Dynamic",
          "subnet": {
            "id": "[resourceId('Microsoft.Network/virtualNetworks/subnets', parameters('virtualNetworkName'), parameters('subnetName'))]"
          }
        }
      }
    ]

>   },
>   "dependsOn": [
>     "[resourceId('Microsoft.Network/virtualNetworks', parameters('virtualNetworkName'))]"
>   ]

Reviewer: VM is normally deployed separate from the VNET so I think we can remove the dependency here because it would be a reference only.

```suggestion
  }
```

}
```

### Configure with Bicep

> To deploy virtual machines that pass this rule:
> 
> - For each IP configuration specified in the `properties.ipConfigurations` property:
>  - Ensure that the `properties.publicIPAddress.id` property does not reference a Public IP resource.
> 
>  For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To deploy VM network interfaces that pass this rule:

- For each IP configuration specified in the `properties.ipConfigurations` property:
  - Ensure that the `properties.publicIPAddress.id` property does not reference a Public IP resource.

For example:
```

```bicep
resource nic 'Microsoft.Network/networkInterfaces@2023-11-01' = {
  name: nicName
  location: location
  properties: {
    ipConfigurations: [
      {
        name: ipconfig
        properties: {
          privateIPAllocationMethod: 'Dynamic'
          subnet: {
            id: resourceId('Microsoft.Network/virtualNetworks/subnets', virtualNetworkName, subnetName)
          }
        }
      }
    ]
  }

>   dependsOn: [
>     virtualNetwork
>   ]

Reviewer: VM is normally deployed separate from the VNET so I think we can remove the dependency here because it would be a reference only.

```suggestion
```
